ResearchGate

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/15164062

Emotional Disclosure Through Writing or Speaking Modulates Latent Epstein-
Barr Virus Antibody Titers

Article jn Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology : March 1994
DOI: 10.1037//0022-006X.62.1.130 - Source: PubMed

CITATIONS READS
236 833

5 authors, including:

Michael Antoni Mary Fletcher
University of Miami and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center Nova Southeastern University

438 PUBLICATIONS 15,388 CITATIONS 289 PUBLICATIONS 10,040 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE

Neil Schneiderman
University of Miami
599 PUBLICATIONS 21,649 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

project SMOKE Break-2 View project

project Cognitive Behavioral Stress Management for HIV-infected Men View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Mary Fletcher on 15 May 2014.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
1994, Vol. 62, No. 1, 130-140

Copyright 1994 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.

0022-006X/94/$3.00

Emotional Disclosure Through Writing or Speaking Modulates Latent

Epstein-Barr Virus Antibody Titers

Brian A. Esterling, Michael H. Antoni, Mary Ann Fletcher, Scott Margulies, and Neil Schneiderman

Healthy Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) seropositive undergraduates (NV = 57) completed a personality
inventory, provided blood samples, and were randomly assigned to write or talk about stressful
events, or to write about trivial events, during three weekly 20-min sessions, after which they pro-
vided a final blood sample. Individuals assigned to the verbal/stressful condition had significantly
lower EBV antibody titers (suggesting better cellular immune control over the latent virus) after the
intervention than those in the written/stressful group, who had significantly lower values than those
in the written/trivial control group. Subjects assigned to the written/stressful condition expressed
more negative emotional words than the verbal/stressful and control groups and more positive emo-
tional words than the verbal/stressful group at each time point. The verbal/stressful group expressed
more negative emotional words compared with the control group at baseline. Content analysis indi-
cated that the verbal/stressful group achieved the greatest improvements in cognitive change, self-

esteem, and adaptive coping strategies.

Writing or talking about stressful events allows individuals to
understand upheavals in their lives. Although talking to others is
a common pathway for understanding traumas, many stressful
events cannot be easily discussed. For example, victims of sex-
ual abuse or war atrocities and perpetrators of crimes or illicit
acts are often hesitant to divulge their experiences because of
guilt or fear of punishment. In order to avoid this guilt or pun-
ishment, they may inhibit their overt behaviors, facial expres-
sions, and language. In addition to inhibiting behavior, individ-
uals may attempt to inhibit conscious thoughts about the con-
cealed information because of its aversive and unresolved
nature. Therefore, even in a socially supportive environment,
these individuals may be unable to confide in others about ex-
tremely upsetting events and must “work” to inhibit their be-
haviors, thoughts, and emotions (Pennebaker & Susman, 1988).

The expression of feelings about stressful life events is gener-
ally believed to play an important role in psychotherapy. Spe-
cifically, emotional expression may facilitate cognitive changes,
such as reappraisal of an event, which may subsequently lead to
adaptive behavior (Greenberg & Safran, 1987; Nichols & Efran,
1985). In recent years, accumulated evidence has suggested that
inhibition of the expression of extremely personal and stressful
experiences to others over a long period of time may be related
to some disease processes (Pennebaker, 1985). To investigate
this “affective discharge” hypothesis, Pennebaker and Beali
(1986) had subjects write anonymous essays, over a period of
several days, about either traumatic or trivial topics. In writing

Brian A. Esterling, Michael H. Antoni, and Scott Margulies, De-
partment of Psychology, University of Miami; Mary Ann Fletcher,
Department of Medicine, University of Miami; Neil Schneiderman,
Department of Psychology, Psychiatry, and Medicine, University of
Miami.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Mi-
chael H. Antoni, Department of Psychology, University of Miami, P.O.
Box 248185, Coral Gables, Florida 33124.

130

about these events, subjects were instructed to focus their
thoughts on the facts, their feelings, or both surrounding a trau-
matic event. Writing about both their feelings and the facts sur-
rounding the traumatic event resulted in fewer health center vis-
its and self-reported illness in the following 6 months. Subse-
quent studies (Pennebaker, Colder, & Sharp, 1990; Pennebaker,
Kiecolt-Glaser, & Glaser, 1988) have replicated these effects,
showing decreases in negative mood and health center visits. In
one of these studies, subjects classified as high emotional dis-
closers on a written task displayed more vigorous lymphocyte
proliferative responses to mitogenic challenge-~an index of im-
mune functioning (Pennebaker et al., 1988). Moreover, subjects
who were instructed to write about their feelings and the facts
surrounding a stressful event showed significant increases in
this index of lymphocyte proliferative responsivity. These re-
sults suggest that a person’s ability to manifest an antigen-spe-
cific cellular immune response against foreign agents such as
viruses or bacteria may be affected by emotional expression.
Talking about a stressful event has also been shown to have
biological consequences in a number of studies. For example,
Pennebaker, Barger, and Tiebout (1989) found that, among Ho-
locaust survivors, those who evidenced lower skin conductance
levels (SCL) and who used the most emotional words when they
disclosed particularly traumatic war-related experiences, dem-
onstrated the greatest improvements in health (i.e., physical
symptoms and physician visits) in the year after the disclosure
interview. This suggested that orally disclosing an extremely
traumatic experience—even more than 40 years after its occur-
rence—had apparent positive health benefits. These findings
have been replicated in college students who either wrote or
talked into a tape recorder while SCL, blood pressure, and heart
rate were continually monitored (Pennebaker, Hughes, &
O’Heeron, 1987). Specifically, talking about traumatic events
was associated with lower SCL and increased cardiovascular ac-
tivity, and this relationship was strongest among high disclosers.
Most of these studies suggest the importance of studying the

WRITING, SPEAKING, AND EBV 131

interaction between expressive style and disclosure perfor-
mance.

Although these expressive factors have been hypothesized to
influence immunologic function and immune-related disease
processes, little is known about how they interact in affecting
specific immune measures related to infectious disease. Instead
of focusing on physical symptoms or physician visits, this study
focused on how emotional disclosure affects the reactivation of
a latent viral pathogen that is extremely prevalent in the general
population, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Typically, primary infec-
tion with EBV, a human herpesvirus, occurs during adoles-
cence. About 40% of patients with primary EBV infections
present with infectious mononucleosis, and the remainder show
no clinical signs of infection (Henle & Henle, 1982). Following
infection, EBV latently infects bursal-equivalent (B-)lympho-
cytes resulting in a persistent infection for the life of the individ-
ual. If the virus is reactivated in these latently infected cells—
possibly because of psychosocial or biological influences—viral
antigens are expressed. These antigens are the products of both
early virus transcription (synthesized independently of virus de-
oxyribonucleic acid [DNA] synthesis) and late transcription,
which depends on the synthesis of new viral DNA. In either
case, the memory cellular and humoral immune responses are
triggered, resulting in increased antibody levels to the early an-
tigen (EA) and late antigen, or viral capsid antigen (VCA), com-
plexes.

Cellular immune defenses are critical both in controlling pri-
mary herpesvirus infections (including EBV) and in maintain-
ing virus latency (Glaser & Gotlieb-Stematsky, 1982). Alterna-
tively, an increase in EBV-VCA antibody (a humoral immune
response) indicates exposure to the virus or reactivation of EBV
from latently infected B-lymphocytes. Increases in these anti-
bodies are believed also to reflect a homeostatic response to the
“spillover” of excess viral antigens that are inadequately con-
trolled by cellular immune mechanisms. Therefore, antibody
titers to various EBV antigens can provide one measure of the
efficiency or adequacy of the cellular immune system’s control
over latent virus (Glaser & Gotleib-Stematsky, 1982). For ex-
ample, patients undergoing immunosuppressive therapies (e.g.,
cancer cytotoxic chemotherapy) or patients infected with the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have characteristic ele-
vations in herpesvirus antibody titers (Esterling et al., 1992;
Tuckwiller & Glaser, 1983), The increased herpesvirus antibody
production in immunosuppressive conditions such as these are
thought to reflect the humoral immune system’s response to an
increased load of opportunistic viral antigens such as EBV and
cytomegalovirus (Rinaldo, Kingsley, & Lyter, 1986). In some
cases, there are also severe clinical symptoms associated with
the reactivation of latent virus (Harada, Bechtold, Seeley, &
Purtilo, 1982; Ho, 1977; Rickinson, Moss, Pope, & Ahlberg,
1980). Thus, high levels of antibody to EBV-VCA may suggest
a nonhomeostatic state in which there is a primary or secondary
infection, or alternatively, reactivation of latent virus.

A recently completed meta-analytic study of 24 human psy-
choimmunological “stressor” studies conducted across the
world revealed that among 20 immunological variables tested,
antibody titers against EBV were found to be the most consis-
tent and significant correlate of psychosocial stressors (Van
Rood, Bogaards, Goulmy, & van Houwelingen, in press). In a

series of widely cited studies, elevated EBV antibodies have
been associated with a variety of psychological stressors, includ-
ing academic stress (Glaser et al., 1987), divorce (Kiecolt-Gla-
ser, Kennedy, et al., 1988), and caring for a family member with
Alzheimer’s disease (Kiecolt-Glaser, Dura, Speicher, Trask, &
Glaser, 1991). More recent work provides evidence that the re-
activation of latent EBV in medical students at the time of ex-
aminations is specific to certain viral proteins (Glaser et al.,
1991) and that lymphocyte proliferative responses to several
EBV antigens are impaired during examination periods (Glaser
etal., in press).

Despite a growing body of evidence supporting the influence
of psychosocial stressors on immunoiogical control over EBV,
only a handful of studies have investigated the role that individ-
ual differences in coping response may play in explaining these
relationships. Previously, we found that the emotional expres-
sion and interpersonal coping style evidenced by healthy people
dealing with stressful traumatic experiences were related to
their EBV antibody titers (Esterling, Antoni, Kumar, & Schnei-
derman, 1990). Specifically, we found that subjects who ab-
stained from disclosing emotional material on a laboratory
writing task had elevated EBV antibody titers. Similarly, sub-
jects who displayed elevations repressive interpersonal styles ac-
cording to personality test scores had higher EBV antibody ti-
ters than those displaying more emotionally expressive interper--
sonal styles.

In the current study, we first sought to replicate the interper-
sonal coping style data from our previous study suggesting
higher EBV reactivation in subjects classified as repressors. The
present study was also designed to address the issue of whether
experimentally manipulating emotional expression can modu-
late EBV antibody titers. Finally, we examined whether EBV
antibody responses following verbal and written disclosure of
stressful events would be different and how seriousness of the
disclosed event, cognitive changes, self-esteem improvements,
and discussion of adaptive coping strategies relate to changes in
EBV antibody titers observed over the course of the disclosure
intervention.

Method
Subjects and Exclusion Criteria

Subjects between the ages of 17 and 22 (M = 18.4 years, SEy = 0.14)
were recruited from the first-year undergraduate class at a large south-
eastern university. Subjects participated to fulfill the requirements of
an introductory psychology course. Several exclusionary criteria (e.g.,
medication use and certain potentially immunomodulatory behaviors)
were used to reduce extraneous sources of variance in immunological
measurements. Subjects were excluded from the study if they reported
current use of any prescription medications, recreational drug use,
heavy cigarette smoking (>1 pack/week), excessive alcohol intake (>10
drinks/week), that they were pregnant, or that they were currently un-
dergoing psychotherapy. Other exclusion criteria included psychiatric
diagnosis, medical illness within the previous 3 months, or self-reported
history of chronic mental or physical illness or skin reactive diseases
that might contribute to immunological dysregulation (¢.g., eczema).
Subjects were required to be free of symptoms that might indicate an
active upper respiratory infection or other infection at the time of the
study. Seventy-two of 75 (39 male and 33 female) subjects met these
criteria, All 72 subjects completed the assessment protocol, although of

132 ESTERLING, ANTONI, FLETCHER, MARGULIES, SCHNEIDERMAN

the original 72 only 57 were determined to be EBV seropositive. Thus,
data from only these 57 subjects were used in study analyses. All 57
subjects completed ail sessions of the intervention and blood donation.

Procedure

Before participation in the study, ail subjects signed an informed con-
sent form that explained the nature of the study. All those meeting the
study criteria completed a battery of measures evaluating their physical
status and several potential behavioral immunomodulatory confounds
{all measures are described in more detail below).

Subjects were randomly assigned to one of the following conditions:
written disclosure of stressful events, verbal disclosure of stressful
events, or a trivial writing condition. In each of the first two conditions,
subjects were asked to recall and focus on a stressful event that had
happened to them and that they had not disclosed to many people. It
was emphasized that they should choose a topic that they felt was highly
stressful or traumatic or about which they felt very guilty. They were
then asked either to write an essay (” = 21) or to speak into a tape
recorder ( = 17) about the event as if they were writing (or speaking) to
someone they could trust. In the trivial written condition (n = 19), sub-
jects simply wrote about trivial topics that were assigned to them (i.e.,
the contents of their bedroom closets, their bedrooms and their cars).
Subjects completed three weekly sessions in which they received the
same instructions, Subjects in each intervention condition had the op-
tion to discuss the same stressful event as in the previous week or to
choose a different stressful event that they had recently encountered.
Approximately 20 min/session was spent in each condition.

Blood for immunological assessment was collected between 1:00 p.m.
and 4:00 p.m. | week before the initial intervention session and at the
same time of day 1 week following the last intervention session. All sub-
jects were debriefed en masse once the entire study was completed.

Psychosocial Assessments

Psychometric measures. At baseline, all subjects completed the Mil-
lon Behavioral Health Inventory (MBHI; Millon, Green, & Meagher,
1982), which assesses individual differences in interpersonal coping
styles. This inventory is composed of 150 true-false forced choice
items, is computer scored, and yields base rate scores pertaining to eight
basic coping styles: Introversive, Inhibited, Cooperative, Sociable, Con-
fident, Forceful, Respectful, and Sensitive. These eight basic coping
styles are based on the personality theory of Millon. The MBHI subscale
scores have a test-retest reliability over 4.5 months ranging from 0.77
to 0.88 with a mean of 0.82 (Millon, 1969; Millon et al., 1982).

As in our previous work (Esterling et al., 1990), subjects were classi-
fied into one of three personality groups, depending on their elevations
on each of the eight coping scales, consonant with the theory underlying
the instrument. One group was designated as repressors, a second group
as sensitizers, and a third comprised subjects with neither personality
style (NP). The MBHI high-point criteria used for creating these group-
ings are described in detail in a previous publication (Esterling et al.,
1990). Twenty-six subjects met the criteria for sensitizers (elevations on
the Inhibited, Forceful, or Sensitive scales), 13 were classified as repres-
sors (elevations on the Introversive, Cooperative, or Respectful scales),
and 18 were classified in the NP group (elevations on the Sociable or
Confident scales).

To test the validity of our classification method for personality, we
compared the base rate elevations for each of the MBHI scales between
groups designated as repressors and sensitizers at baseline. Consistent
with the test authors, we found that scores on the MBHI Introversive,
F(1, 45) = 28.56, p < .001; Cooperative, F(1, 45) = 8.87, p < .01; and
Respectful F(1, 45) = 13.82, p < .001, style scales were significantly
higher for repressors, compared with sensitizers. Further, scores on

MBHI Avoidant, F(1, 45) = 8.81, p < .01; Forceful, F(1, 45) = 12.06, p
< .001; and Sensitive, F(1, 45) = 60.87, p < .001, scales were signifi-
cantly higher for sensitizers, compared with repressors.

Subjects classified as repressors ostensibly have an inner need to deny
negative feelings to themselves and others, tend to appear content in the
face of problems, and may attempt to please others with self-sacrificing
behaviors (Millon et al., 1982). Individuals classified as sensitizers os-
tensibly come across to others as overbearing, aggressive, rivalrous, and
confident; tend to have a low level of frustration tolerance; and are quick
to express their negative feelings.

Behavioral measures. All tape recordings of the experimental ses-
sions were transcribed verbatim and verified by having a second judge
listen to the tape while reading the transcription. Once all disclosures
from the sessions were converted to a written format, each essay was
read independently by two judges who were unaware of the other data
in the study, as well as of each other’s ratings. In scoring the essays, the
number of emotional words was computed in line with previous re-
search (Esterling et al., 1990; Pennebaker et al., 1988). Ratings of the
percentages of total emotional words were averaged across the judges at
each time point and served as the index of emotional expressiveness on
this behavioral task. A word was scored as emotional if it satisfied two
criteria: The word had to describe a human feeling (e.g., she /oves her
mother), and it could not describe a physical action (e.g., they went to
make /ove). The difference between the two types of words is that any
word describing a human emotion can have a more intense (or less in-
tense) emotional word substituted in its place. In the first example, “she
Joves her mother” can be converted into “she dikes her mother” and still
make sense. This is not true in the second statement, “they went to
make /ove,” because the referent of the emotional word /ove is the act of
having sex. Thus, the word /oves in the first example would have been
scored, and the word /ove in the second example woutd not have been
scored. Two emotional expression indices were computed with respect
to valence (positive and negative emotional word use).

Content ratings were also conducted on all written and verbal dis-
closures, using a form modified from Murray, Lamnin, and Carver
(t989) and Donnelly and Murray (1991). After the essays were read
for emotional word content, all essays and verbal transcriptions were
read again and were independently and subjectively rated on a 7-point
scale (1 = none, 4 = somewhat, and 7 = very much) by the aforemen-
tioned two judges according to evidence of positive cognitive appraisal
change (e.g., were alternative explanations discussed and to what de-
gree, or was there evidence of better understanding of the problem and
to what degree?), se/festeem improvements (e.g., was there evidence
that the subject felt better about self, or less down on self, and to what
degree?), and degree to which adaptive coping strategies were dis-
cussed (e.g., was there evidence that the subject expressed feelings to
people, became more assertive, or took more interpersonal risks?).
These dimensions were scored as high only if there was explicit evi-
dence in the essay regarding any particular dimension (e.g., if the sub-
ject provided behavioral examples). Low scores were given if there was
no explicit evidence in the essay or if the dimension was addressed
only implicitly (e.g., if the subject wanted to express anger to an ex-
boyfriend without actually providing an example of where or how this
would be done). In addition, the seriousness of event was rated on each
subject’s essay or tape transcription. This dimension was scored as
high if the subject felt that the event was stressful to them. This item
was scored independent of the objective nature of the stressful event.
For example, failing an exam was scored high for someone who pro-
vided examples of not being able to achieve life goals but low for some-
one who approached the topic casually. The two judges’ scores were
averaged for each rating index at each time point.

In addition, five subjects were randomly selected, and all three ses-
sions for each were independently scored by an advanced clinical psy-
chology graduate student trained to check interrater reliability for each

WRITING, SPEAKING, AND EBV 133

of the above ratings (number of emotional words and content analysis).
A Pearson correlation was calculated for each of the three sessions with
each rating. A composite reliability coefficient for each rating was com-
puted by averaging the three obtained weekly correlations. Average in-
terrater reliability coefficients for the six ratings ranged from 0.78 to
0.95 (all ps < .01).

Self-report control measures. Subjects were asked to describe any
infectious disease symptoms, particularly symptoms associated with
respiratory tract infections, that they had experienced within the previ-
ous | and 6 months, respectively. Consistent with previous methodolog-
ical suggestions in behavioral immunological research (Kiecolt-Glaser
& Glaser, 1988), we also collected self-report data on the amount of
restful sleep (over the previous week), and the amount of hard physical
(sports and work-related) activity, average kilocaloric intake, and recre-
ational substance use over the previous 6 months. In addition, each sub-
ject’s lean body mass was calculated according to Metropolitan Life In-
surance actuarial tables, which take into account body weight and
frame size in determining the subject’s deviation from his or her ideal
weight (i.e., the weight that maximizes life expectancy).

Viral Serology

Blood samples were collected from all subjects and the serum frac-
tions were evaluated for immunoglobulin-G (IgG) antibodies against
the VCA and EA components of EBV. We used reagents supplied as kits
(Organon Teknika, number 9100-11) and used the indirect immuno-
fluorescence method (IFA). The procedure followed was in accordance
with Henle and Henle (1982) and is described in more detail in a previ-
ous study (Esterling et al., 1990). Antibody titers to EBV-VCA and
EBV-EA were determined by the highest dilution of serum able to dem-
onstrate IFA-positive cells. Antibody titers to EBV-EA were examined
to determine whether the high levels of EBV-VCA antibodies in some
subjects were due to the result of a primary infection. Data are pre-
sented as the mean log, transformation of the highest dilution where
immunofluorescence was detected. As mentioned previously, only 57
study subjects were determined to be EBV seropositive.

Results
Control Measures

Before interpreting intervention-associated immunological
changes, it was important that we investigate self-reported con-
founding variables that might account for the variance ob-
served in the antibody outcome data. To test whether sleep,
physical activity, caloric intake, alcohol use, or lean body mass
could account (uniquely or in combination) for immune data
variance, we performed a stepwise multiple regression. It was
determined that none of these variables contributed a signifi-
cant amount of the variance in baseline EBV-VCA titer vari-
ability, all Fs < 1. No significant effects were found when subject
gender was included as an additional variable, so data for both
sexes were combined. In addition to testing for direct effects of
the confounding variables (e.g., sleep or lean body mass) on
EBV-VCA titers, it was determined individually using analysis
of variance (ANOVA) that none of these variables differed
among groups classified by either personality cluster or by treat-
ment condition, all Fs < 1 (Table 1). Finally, chi-square analysis
determined that the groups did not differ with respect to per-
sonality group classification, x7(4) = 7.9, which was nonsig-
nificant.

As a further control, antibody titers to EBV-EA were as-

sessed to determine if any of the subjects were recovering from a
primary EBV viral infection. Subjects in such a recovery phase
might show EBV-VCA levels that are not representative of la-
tent virus reactivation and more indicative of a primary re-
sponse to initial viral challenge (Sumaya, 1986). It was found
that all subjects had antibody titers to EBV-EA in the normal
range (i.e., a log, dilution factor of 3.32, which corresponds to a
dilution factor of 1:10), suggesting that the sample was EBV-
VCA seropositive yet not undergoing primary viral infection
(Roberts, 1989).

Behavioral Measures

Content analysis. As in previous studies using similar para-
digms, the content of the essays suggested that subjects uni-
formly disclosed highly personal and upsetting experiences, of-
ten powerful and poignant. The three stressful experiences dis-
cussed most frequently in the stressful conditions were death of
a relative or friend, divorce of parents, and break-up of a ro-
mantic relationship. The frequency of these themes did not
differ between the written/stressful and verbal/stressful disclo-
sure groups. Further, the written/stressful and verbal/stressful
groups did not differ in the ratings of seriousness of the event
disclosed (M = 5.1, SExy = 0.23, and M = 4.6, SEy = 0.26,
respectively), and both groups reported events rated as more
serious than those reported by the control group (M = 1.0, SExy
= 0.0), F(2, 54) = 106.48, p < .0001, which did not differ across
time, F <1.

In addition to the seriousness of the events, the verbal/stress-
ful group had significantly greater evidence of cognitive change
compared with the written/stressful group, and both groups dis-
played more cognitive change compared with the control group,
F(2, 54) = 15.35, p < .0001. The disclosures of the verbal/stress-
ful group were also rated significantly higher on self-esteem im-
provements compared with those of the written/stressful and
control groups, which did not differ from each other, F(2, 54) =
8.17, p < .001. Finally, the verbal/stressful group’s disclosures
were rated as displaying significantly more adaptive coping
strategies than those of the written/stressful and control groups,
which again did not differ from each other, F(2, 54) = 14.69, p
< .0001. There was no Group X Time interaction on any of
these variables, Fs < 1.

Emotional expression. Asa manipulation check of the ex-
perimental conditions, we compared the degree of emotional
disclosure displayed by subjects in each of the experimental
groups. The intervention groups differed significantly with re-
spect to total words expressed during the sessions, F(2, 54) =
69.71, p < .0001. Specifically, subjects in the verbal/stressful
condition expressed significantly more words (M = 1250.1
words, SE, = 25.3) per session compared with the written (M7
= 288.9 words, SEy = 3.0) and control (M = 217.1 words, SEy
= 3.0) groups, which did not differ from each other. As a result,
percentages of emotional words were computed to control for
the different numbers of total words expressed.

A 3 X 3 (Intervention Group X Time Point) split-plot facto-
tial ANOVA showed significant group differences for total, F(2,
54) = 22.11, p < .001; negative, F(2, 54) = 42.12, p< .001; and
positive, F(2, 54) = 6.57, p < .01, emotional words, although
there was no significant change over time in any group, all F's <

134

ESTERLING, ANTONI, FLETCHER, MARGULIES, SCHNEIDERMAN

Table 1
Immunological Confounds Between the Intervention Groups
Trivial/control Written/stressful Verbal/stressful Total

Variable M SExy M SEu M SEu M SEy
Age 18.3 0.22 18.7 0.26 18.3 0.24 18.4 0.14
Calories/day 1,773.7 185.2 1,719.0 106.4 1,782.4 170.7 1,756.1 87.5
Alcohol use/week (drinks) 1.4 0.54 3.8 1.3 4.2 2.5 3.2 0.90
Physical activity/week (hr) 24 0.57 2.8 0.59 24 0.62 2.6 0.34
Sleep/day (hr) 79 0.35 74 0.38 15 0.34 76 0.21
Lean body mass 102.8 3.4 102.6 2.8 105.8 4.0 103.6 1.9

1. Tukey post hoc tests (p < .05) determined that the written/
stressful group expressed significantly more total and negative
emotional words than the verbal/stressful and control groups
and significantly more positive emotional words than the ver-
bal/stressful group at each time point (Figure 1). The verbal/
stressful group expressed significantly more negative emotional
words compared with the control group at Week 1. All other
comparisons yielded nonsignificant differences.

EBV-VCA Antibody Titers

Personality correlates. A one-way ANOVA showed signifi-
cant differences on pre-intervention EBV antibody titers among

a)
1.6
14
$12
3 1 a Trivial
y 08 —@ Written
% : —t— Verbal
3 0.6
Zz
S04
0.2
0
Week 1 Week2 Week 3
b)
0.8
0.7
906
505 ae Trivial
rm —@— Written
3 . —t— Verbal
£03
For
o as
0
Week I Week 2 Week 3
Figure 1. Mean (+SE,) percentage of (a) negative and (b) positive

words expressed across time.

the three personality classifications, F(2, 54) = 4.10, p < .05.
These tests were followed up by Tukey post hoc tests, which
revealed that repressors had significantly higher levels of EBV
antibody titers than the NP and sensitizer groups, which did not
differ from each other (Figure 2).

Experimental effects. At baseline, subjects randomly as-
signed to each group were equivalent in EBV-VCA antibody
levels, F < 1. A 3 X 2 (Intervention Group X Pre- and Postin-
tervention) split-plot factorial repeated measures ANOVA re-
vealed a significant Group X Time interaction for EBV-VCA
antibody titers, F(2, 54) = 11.73, p < .001 (Figure 3). A priori
planned-comparison contrasts revealed no significant changes
in EBV-VCA titers within the control group, F(1, 18) = 2.82,
ns. This was in contrast to the written/stressful group, F(1, 20)
= 12.31, p < .01, and the verbal/stressful group, F(1, 16) =
17.69, p < .001, which showed significant decreases in levels
of antibody titers to EBV-VCA over the course of the 4-week
observation period.

After 3 weeks of participation in the disclosure intervention,
significant differences between the groups resulted, F(2, 54) =
10.20, p < .001. Tukey post hoc tests (p < .05) at the postin-
tervention time point confirmed that subjects in the control
condition (Mf = 7.53, SEy = 0.27) had significantly higher an-
tibody titers to EBV-VCA than those in the written/stressful

9
aA
bo
cr)
a
Ej
=
ze 8
Z
E
4 7
dl
E

6

Repressor Neither Sensitizer
Personality Group

Figure 2. Mean (+SEy) Epstein-Barr virus-viral capsid antigen
(EBV-VCA) antibody titer values for personality groups.

WRITING, SPEAKING, AND EBV 135

a 8.0

Ey

3 1S a Trivial
Fe 7.0 —@ Written
P=

z 65 —a— Verbal
2 60

<

S55

id

z 5.0

“ 45

. T —
Pre Post
Time

Figure 3. Mean (+SEy) Epstein-Barr virus-viral capsid antigen
(EBV-VCA) antibody titer values at pre- and postintervention time
points.

condition (M = 6.42, SEy, = 0.29), whose titers were signifi-
cantly higher than observed for the verbal/stressful condition
(M = 5.48, SEy = 0.38).

Finally, experimental condition (dummy coded using three
vectors), personality style (dummy coded using three vectors),
degree of emotional expression at Week 3 (negative and positive
emotional words), and emotional content (cognitive reap-
praisal, enhanced self-esteem, adaptive coping, and seriousness
of event) were entered in a hierarchical multiple regression
model to predict changes in EBV antibody titers. The overall
model with all predictors was significant, F(10, 46) = 5.05, p<
.0001, and accounted for 53.2% of the variance in EBV anti-
body titer change (Table 2). As expected, experimental group
assignment was the most significant predictor of EBV antibody
change. In addition, personality style significantly predicted
EBV antibody titer change, with subjects classified as sensitizers
having greater decreases in antibody titers over the course of
the intervention. Increases in the number of expressed negative
emotional words over the intervention significantly predicted
greater decreases in EBV antibody titer level, although positive

emotional word changes did not significantly predict EBV anti-
body titer change. Finally, greater cognitive change, enhanced
self-esteem, and seriousness of event predicted greater decreases
in EBV antibody titers, whereas adaptive coping strategies were
not related to EBV antibody change.

Discussion

Previously, we found that subjects who abstained from dis-
closing emotional material on a laboratory task, or who were
psychometrically classified as having a repressive interpersonal
style, had higher EBV antibody titers, suggesting poorer immu-
nological control of latent EBV (Esterling et al., 1990). We rea-
soned in the present study that by manipulating emotional ex-
pression through different mechanisms of arousal (i.e., speaking
vs. writing), antibody titers to EBV might be modulated down-
ward. Specifically, we found that participation in either a writ-
ten or a verbal emotional disclosure intervention significantly
decreased EBV antibody titers over a 4-week observation pe-
riod. Although equivalent at baseline, individuals assigned to
the verbal/stressful group showed significantly lower antibody
titer values after the intervention than those in the written/
stressful group, who had significantly lower values than those in
the control group. Further, it was found that subjects assigned
to the written/stressful group expressed significantly more total
and negative emotional words than the verbal/stressful and con-
trol groups and significantly more positive emotional words
than the verbal/stressful group at each time point. The verbal/
stressful group expressed significantly more negative emotional
words compared with the control group at Week 1. Further, the
verbal/stressful group was rated higher in cognitive change, self-
esteem improvements, and adaptive coping strategies as com-
pared with the other groups. Finally, results confirmed our pre-
vious research, which suggested that individuals classified as
having a repressive personality style have significantly higher
EBV antibody titers compared with sensitizers (Esterling et al.,
1990).

Compared with previous EBV seroepidemiological studies,
which have shown characteristic EBV-VCA IgG geometric
means of the raw titers ranging from 1:10 to 1:80 (log. = 3.32

Table 2
Hierarchical Multiple Regression of Change in Epstein-Barr Virus Antibody Titer
: R?
Variable i R R? Change F dfs Pp
Step |
5 Experimental group —0.36*** 0.53 0.28 0.28 10.09 2,54 0001
tep
Interpersonal coping style —0.24* 0.58 0.33 0.05 6.31 4,52 001
Step 3: Degree of emotional expression
Negative words —0.33* 0.63 0.39 0.06 $.29 6, 50 .001
Positive words 0.14
Step 4: Emotional content
Cognitive change —0.33* 0.73 0.53 0.14 5.05 10, 46 0001
Self-esteem —0,38*
Coping —0.21
Seriousness —0.48**
*p<.05. *p<.0l. **p<.001.

136 ESTERLING, ANTONI, FLETCHER, MARGULIES, SCHNEIDERMAN

and 6.32, respectively) in normal adult populations (Henle &
Henle, 1982), our sample appeared to have slightly elevated
means at baseline but fall far short of the serologic pattern doc-
umented in patients who are immunologically compromised
because of immunosuppressive diseases, cancers such as Bur-
kitt’s lymphoma or nasopharyngeal carcinoma, or therapies
that directly suppress the immune system (Tuckwiller & Glaser,
1983). Elevated antibody titers in healthy individuals not
suffering from these conditions are thought to occur in response
to enhanced expression of latent virus facilitated by change, or
dysfunction of, different thymus-derived (T)-lymphocyte sub-
populations (Henle & Henle, 1982; Klein et al., 1981; Rickin-
son et al., 1981). Unfortunately, because all of this work has
involved in vitro assays, it is difficult to determine with cer-
tainty just how the viral genome is latently controlled and how
it subsequently becomes reactivated. Whatever the mechanism,
the elevated EBV-VCA antibody titers noted in our subjects
suggest that there was some compromise in their viral antibody
response, which approached normal values as a function of par-
ticipating in the written/stressful or verbal/stressful interven-
tion conditions.

It is not surprising that healthy first-year undergraduates
demonstrated elevated antibody titers to EBV at this time of
year. There is much accumulated evidence that EBV is sensitive
to psychological phenomena (e.g., academic stress, marital dis-
Tuption, caregiving, personality), as demonstrated in previous
studies in our laboratory and others (Esterling, Antoni, Kumar,
& Schneiderman, 1993; Esterling et al., 1990, 1992; Glaser, Kie-
colt-Glaser, Speicher, & Holliday, 1985; Glaser et al., in press;
1991). Although we did not measure stress explicitly, the sub-
jects may have been experiencing stress because of separation
from family and friends, moving to a new environment (many
of the students who attend the university are not from the neigh-
boring area), increased expectations and pressure with respect
to academic achievement, and so on. Collectively, these events
could have been stressful enough to reactivate EBV to a degree
where antibody titers would be elevated. In fact, many of the
topics chosen focused on these types of events (e.g., failing an
exam, moving away from a boyfriend or girlfriend, loneliness
due to difficulty making friends, etc.).

A final limitation of this study involves the interpretations of
the antibody data. However, because only one type of antibody
was evaluated, it is possible that the relationships found were
due to an overall change in antibody levels (i.e., polyclonal B cell
activation secreting IgG) and were not specific to EBV-VCA.
Although the possibility that B cells were polyclonally stimu-
lated cannot be ruled out, in two previous studies we found no
correlation between levels of antibody to EBV and Forrsman
antibody, a marker of polyclonal B cell activation (Esterling et
al., 1992, 1993).

Talking Versus Writing

In an effort to understand the processes that differ between
speaking and writing about stressful events, attention has fo-
cused on cognitive appraisal. Murray et al. (1989) compared
brief psychotherapy with written expression in a population
comparable to the one used in this study. They found that writ-
ten expression of emotion was quite effective in temporarily

arousing negative affect, but not in changing feelings about
traumatic events, although some self-generated cognitive
changes did occur. In contrast, verbal expression aroused less
negative affect, but resulted in much more cognitive reappraisal
and a dramatic shift to positive affect, as well as a basic change
in attitude about stressful events. The latter findings appear to
have been replicated in the present study, where we found that
the verbal/stressful group showed higher ratings for cognitive
change, self-esteem improvements, and adaptive coping strate-
gies compared with the written/stressful and control groups.
Further, recent work from our lab suggests that changes in the
way stressful events are cognitively processed during a disclo-
sure manipulation are also predictive of decreases in EBV-
VCA antibody titers over a similar 1-month period (Lutgendorf,
Antoni, Kumar, & Schneiderman, in press). Further, we found
that greater expression of negative affect words, as well as
greater cognitive reappraisal, self-esteem, and seriousness of
event chosen predicted decreases in EBV-VCA antibody titers
over the 4-week observation period. Therefore, ventilation of
negative feelings may be the important event in written disclo-
sure, whereas cognitive reappraisal, enhanced self-esteem, and
generation of adaptive coping strategies may be achieved
through verbal expression.

Our data support other research that has investigated the
effects of written expression on health care utilization and phys-
ical symptoms. For example, Greenberg and Stone (in press)
found that subjects who disclosed more severe traumas re-
ported fewer physical symptoms in the months following the
study, compared with both subjects reporting low-severity trau-
mas and those in a control group, independent of previous dis-
closure history. In addition, Pennebaker and Beall (1986)
showed that writing emotionally about stressful events de-
creased health center visits in the 6 months following the study.
Our data suggest one immunological pathway by which emo-
tional expression may contribute to the health findings noted in
these studies.

Emotional Experience Versus Emotional Expression

In examining the interactions between emotional arousal and
immune function, the literature suggests that immune function
and health are modulated differently depending on whether in-
dividuals are subjected to emotionally arousing situations or
have an appropriate outlet for the expression of those emotions.
Several studies have found that writing about stressful events
leads to increased experience and expression of emotion, par-
ticularly anxiety (Pennebaker & Beall, 1986; Pennebaker et al.,
1987, 1988). This increased experience of anxiety has further
been correlated with decreased health center visits, improve-
ment in cardiovascular health indices, and increases in mitogen
responsiveness, a marker of cellular proliferation in response
to a novel antigen (Pennebaker & Beall, 1986; Pennebaker &
O’Heeron, 1984; Pennebaker et al., 1987, 1988, 1989).

However, there also exist studies in which heightened trait-
anxiety is related to lower levels of monocytes (an immune cell)
and increases in endogenous hormones such as cortisol, prolac-
tin, testosterone, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and thyrotro-
pin-releasing hormone, all of which play a role in reduced cel-
lular control over latent EBV (Demyttenaere, Nijs, Evers-Kie-

WRITING, SPEAKING, AND EBV 137

booms, & Koninckx, 1989; Herbert, Moore, de la Riva, &
Watts, 1986; Kasvikis et al., 1988; Laakmann, Hinz, & Neu-
hauser, 1986; Salmon et al., 1989). Moreover, anxiety-provok-
ing events (e.g., medical school examination, marital disrup-
tion, or antibody testing for human immunodeficiency virus
[{HIV-1]) have also been associated with decrements in markers
of cellular immune functioning, including reactivation of latent
EBV (Antoni et al., 1990; Glaser et al., 1985, 1991, 1987; Kie-
colt-Glaser et al., 1987, 1988). One team found that examina-
tion stress and marital disruption were associated with in-
creased EBV antibody titers and transformation of B-lympho-
cytes, as well as decreased antigen-specific memory T-cell
response, as measured by the ability of peripheral blood T-lym-
phocytes to respond to EBV-specific polypeptides (Glaser et al.,
1985, 1987, 1991). In other work, anticipatory anxiety levels
and intrusive thoughts were related to higher plasma cortisol
levels and lower lymphocyte proliferative responses to mito-
genic stimulation (Antoni et al., 1990, 1991; Ironson et al.,
1990; McKinnon, Weisse, Reynolds, Bowles, & Baum, 1989).

Therefore, these and previous data suggest that the experi-
ence of an emotion (e.g., anxiety) does not by itself have a ben-
eficial effect on the immune response against latent viruses such
as EBV; in fact, the opposite seems to be the case. On the one
hand, experiencing heightened emotion without the opportu-
nity to release or express it in a constructive manner may be
detrimental to various components of the cellular immune sys-
tem. On the other hand, if with heightened emotion there is an
easily accessible and comfortable route of discharge (e.g., writ-
ing or talking about the stressful event), disclosure may have
beneficial effects in modulating the orchestration of effective
communication within the viral surveillance system with re-
spect to EBV. In fact, the distinction between emotional experi-
ence and expression may help to explain the relatively low or
nonexistent correlations between most measures of negative
affect, neuroticism, and anxiety with traditional health out-
come measures. Specifically, chronically highly anxious individ-
uals. may be at highest risk for health decrements, but may also
benefit most from expressive therapies, compared with less anx-
ious individuals or ones who are not in touch with their emo-
tional world (i.e., repressors).

Personality Correlates

The present study confirms our previous findings (Esterling
et al., 1990) suggesting that subjects who ostensibly have an in-
ner need to deny negative feelings to themselves and others and
who appear content in the face of problems (i.e., repressors)
have greater reactivation of latent EBV compared with those
subjects who have low levels of frustration tolerance and who
are quick to express their negative feelings (i.e., sensitizers). Fur-
ther, the fact that we did not find an interaction between person-
ality classification and group assignment suggests that both
writing and speaking about stressful events have beneficial phys-
iological effects, independent of personality factors related to
emotional proclivities.

It has been hypothesized that “physiological work” is re-
quired to inhibit ongoing behavior, thoughts, or feelings
(Fowles, 1980; Gray, 1975). Specifically, immediately following
a stressful event, behavioral (and perhaps emotional) inhibition

is accompanied by increased sympathetic nervous activity
(Fowles, 1980) and increased sympathetic firing in the septal
and hippocampal regions of the brain (Gray, 1975). It is plausi-
ble that, if this behavior pattern continues, the work of inhibi-
tion may serve as a low-level chronic stressor that has the poten-
tial of long-term dysregulation of viral pathogens. If this hy-
pothesis is correct, it may explain the immunological
differences noted in those individuals who freely express nega-
tive emotion in response to stressful events versus those individ-
uals who express less affect following similar events.

Previously, we found that subjects high in defensive coping or
anxiety may have an increased risk for reactivation of latent
EBV among EBV seropositive, but healthy, individuals (Ester-
ling et al., 1993). This, combined with previous data, suggests
that a large number of psychological variables at least correlate
with EBV antibody titers. Previously, we found that subjects
classified as low in expressed emotion, or who had high scores
on the repressor scales of the MBHI (i.e., our repressors), were
correctly classified as repressors 35% of the time (i.e., high de-
fensive-low anxious) using the construct originally proposed by
Weinberger, Schwartz, and Davidson (1979). In contrast, 47%
of the previously classified repressors were classified as high de-
fensive-high anxious according to Weinberger et al. (1979). In
addition, 28% of the previously classified sensitizers were classi-
fied as repressors using Weinberger et al.’s criteria. Finally, the
fact that the anxiety-by-defensiveness interaction accounted for
such a small proportion of the variance in EBV titers raised
questions about whether these two measures should be com-
bined to form artificial constructs of repression in investiga-
tions of health correlates (e.g., Weinberger et al., 1979). The fact
that we did not find that the interaction between anxiety and
defensiveness contributed to EBV-VCA variance in our prior
work, and a very different pattern of results was obtained when
such a classification system was used, draws light into the po-
tential problems with the current standard classification system
for repressive coping. Therefore, how one defines repression re-
mains a very important concept when interpreting, understand-
ing, and comparing data across laboratories.

Methodological Issues

In the present design, subjects assigned to the written/stress-
ful group expressed significantly more negative and positive
emotional words compared with the verbal/stressful and con-
trol groups. The written group apparently expressed more emo-
tion than the verbal group. However, some aspects of our
method limit such conclusions. For example, there appears to
have been a difference in investment in the task. Specifically,
subjects assigned to the trivial task wrote fairly short essays
compared with the other groups. Further, the verbal/stressful
group spoke on average five times as many words as the written/
stressful group, principally because it is easier to talk than to
write and easier to go into much greater detail when speaking
about everything regarding a stressful event. Therefore, the per-
centages of emotional words expressed by the verbal group may
be lower than expected because their emotional expression was
“diluted” by other thoughts and expressions about the stressful
event (i.e., greater detail was expressed). Because the verbal
group as a whole expressed many more total words compared

138 ESTERLING, ANTONI, FLETCHER, MARGULIES, SCHNEIDERMAN

with the other groups, and because of their potentially greater
involvement in the task, their overall percentage scores may
have been lower. Although involvement was not coded, it may
provide some insight into the immunological differences noted
between the verbal and written/stressful conditions. Other re-
cent work in our jab suggests that greater involvement in a ver-
bal disclosure task predicts greater decrements in EBV-VCA
antibody titers over a similar 4-week period (Lutgendorf et al.,
in press).

Second, it is possible that time since occurrence of the stress-
ful event disclosed may have had an impact on our results. For
example, recent stressful events that the subjects chose to dis-
cuss, as compared with events in the more distant past, may be
related differently to EBV reactivation, resulting in an interac-
tion of therapy intervention and time of stressful event experi-
ence. This is especially salient in light of other work in our lab-
oratory that has shown that subjects who disclosed older and
more troublesome events had higher levels of antibody to EBV,
suggesting greater viral reactivation (Lutgendorf et al., in press).
Unfortunately, these data were not collected, and this question
cannot be addressed with this sample.

Clinical Implications

In this study, we show that both writing and speaking about
stressful events have a beneficial effect on the immune response
to EBV, and that the act of writing about nonstressful events is
inconsequential. This suggests that the act of writing per se is
not enough to cause immunological changes, at least as mea-
sured in the present study. Verbalizing the event may produce a
deeper awareness of the emotional issues surrounding the stres-
sor, because people get to rehearse a behavior that more realisti-
cally captures the ways in which they are accustomed to venti-
lating their feelings and frustrations. Of course, the possibility
remains that the mere act of talking—even about trivial
matters—might bring about immunological changes similar to
those seen in this study. Future work is needed to investigate
this hypothesis.

Because we and others have shown that verbal or written ex-
pression of stressful events creates an initial upsurge of negative
mood (Donnelly & Murray, 1991), questions regarding the
practical uses of such methods have been raised. For example,
although verbal or written expression seems to have a therapeu-
tic effect, the negative affect experienced in the initial session
may lead individuals to drop out of therapy before a therapeutic
effect is observed. In our study we minimized our attrition rate
by providing an incentive of undergraduate course credit. In the
clinical application of such techniques, motivating individuals
to participate and persist would be very important. One
method, as suggested by several authors (L’Abate, 1991; Phillips
& Wiener, 1966), might include combining written homework
with expressive psychotherapy. Indeed, verbal homework might
work even better than written homework when physical, as well
as emotional, health is a goal of therapy.

Conclusion

The findings of this study may be important for healthy indi-
viduals, as well as for high-risk and HIV-1 seropositive popula-

tions. EBV antibody titers may serve as a marker for viral sur-
veillance, in general, of other pathogens, leading to the idea that
psychosocial stress may place a burden on the host’s immune
system, which may have consequences for other diseases. Be-
cause psychological interventions have been shown here and
elsewhere to be effective in modulating immune system control
over EBV and other herpesviruses (Esterling et al., 1992), they
may provide an adjunctive treatment that could be offered over
and above traditional medical treatments. Further, because of
the close interacting relationship between EBV and life-threat-
ening viruses such as HIV, EBV reactivation may have serious
consequences, such as increased HIV viral load or increased
viral transport within the host (Roncella et al., 1990; Rosenberg
& Fauci, 1991). One remaining question that needs further in-
vestigation is whether psychosocial variables can influence la-
tent herpes virus infections that might have clinical significance
in people diagnosed with AIDS or some cancers. Because her-
pesvirus infections are important in HIV-related clinical condi-
tions (e.g., cytomegalovirus retinitis, herpes zoster infections,
EBV, and herpes simplex virus infections), the present findings
may provide an important impetus for considering the role of
psychosocial factors when developing treatment strategies for
these conditions.

References

Antoni, M. H., August, S., LaPerriere, A., Baggett, L., Klimas, N.,
Tronson, G., Schneiderman, N., & Fletcher, M. A. (1990). Psycholog-
ical and neuroendocrine measures related to functional immune
changes in anticipation of HIV-1 serostatus notification. Psychoso-
matic Medicine, 52, 496-510.

Antoni, M. H., Schneiderman, N., Klimas, N., LaPerriere, A., Ironson,
G., & Fletcher, M. A. (1991). Disparities in psychological, neuroen-
docrine, and immunologic patterns in asymptomatic HIV-1 seropos-
itive and seronegative gay men. Biological Psychiatry, 29, 1023-1041.

Demyttenaere, K., Nijs, P., Evers-Kiebooms, G., & Koninckx, P. R.
(£989). The effect of a specific emotional stressor on prolactin, corti-
sol, and testosterone concentrations in women varies with their trait
anxiety. Fertility and Sterility, 52, 942-948.

Donnelly, D. A., & Murray, E. J. (1991). Emotional changes in written
essays and therapy interviews. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 10, 334-350.

Esterling, B. A., Antoni, M. H., Kumar, M., & Schneiderman, N.
(1990). Emotional repression, stress disclosure responses and Ep-
stein-Barr viral capsid antigen titers. Psychosomatic Medicine, 52,
397-410.

Esterling, B. A., Antoni, M. H., Kumar, M., & Schneiderman, N.
(1993). Defensiveness, trait anxiety and Epstein-Barr viral capsid an-
tigen titers in healthy college students. Health Psychology, 12, 133-
140.

Esterling, B. A., Antoni, M. H., Schneiderman, N., Carver, C. S., La-
Perriere, A., Ironson, G., Klimas, N. G., & Fletcher, M. A. (1992).
Psychosocial modulation of antibody to Epstein-Barr viral capsid an-
tigen and human herpesvirus type-6 in HIV-|-infected and at-risk gay
men. Psychosomatic Medicine, 54, 354-371.

Fowles, D. C. (1980). The three arousal model: Implications of Gray’s
two-factor theory for heart rate, electrodermal activity and psychop-
athy, Psychophysiology, 17, 87-104.

Glaser, R., & Gotlieb-Stematsky, T. (1982). Human herpesvirus infec-
tions: Clinical aspects. New York: Marcel Dekker.

Glaser, R., Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Speicher, C. E., & Holliday, J. E. (1985).
Stress, loneliness, and changes in herpesvirus latency. Journal of Be-
havioral Medicine, 8, 249-260.

WRITING, SPEAKING, AND EBV 139

Glaser, R., Pearson, G. R., Bonneau, R. H., Esterling, B. A., Atkinson,
C.A., & Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. (in press). Stress and the memory T-cell
response to the Epstein-Barr virus. Health Psychology.

Glaser, R., Pearson, G. R., Jones, J. F., Hillhouse, J., Kennedy, S., Mao,
H., & Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. (1991). Stress-related activation of Ep-
stein-Barr virus. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 5, 219-232.

Glaser, R., Rice, J., Sheridan, J., Fertal, R., Stout, J., Speicher, C., Pin-
shy, D., Kotur, M., Post, A., Beck, M., & Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. (1987).
Stress-related immune suppression: Health implications. Brain, Be-
havior, and Immunity, I, 7-20.

Gray, J. A. (1975). Elements of a two-process theory of learning. New
York: Academic Press.

Greenberg, L.S., & Safran, J. D. (1987). Emotion in psychotherapy. New
York: Guilford Press.

Greenberg, M. A., & Stone, A. A. (in press). Emotional disclosure about
traumas and health: Effects of previous disclosure and trauma sever-
ity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.

Harada, S., Bechtold, T., Seeley, J. K., & Purtilo, D. T. (1982). Cell-
mediated immunity to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and natural killer
(NK)-cell activity in the X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome, Jn-
ternational Journal of Cancer, 30, 734-744.

Henle, W., & Henle, G. (1982). Epstein-Barr virus and infectious mono-
nucleosis. In R. Glaser and T. Gottleib-Stematsky (Eds.), Human her-
pesvirus infections: Clinical aspects. New York: Marcel Dekker.

Herbert, J., Moore, G. F., de la Riva, C., & Watts, F. N. (1986). Endo-
crine responses and examination anxiety. Biological Psychology, 22,
215-226,

Ho, M. (1977). Virus infections after transplantation in man. Brief re-
view, Archives of Virology, 55, 1-24.

Ironson, G., LaPerriere, A., Antoni, M., O’Hearn, P., Schneiderman,
N., Klimas, N., & Fletcher, M. A. (1990). Changes in immune and
psychological measures as a function of anticipation and reaction to
news of HIV-! antibody status. Psychosomatic Medicine, 52, 247-
270.

Kasvikis, ¥. G., Basoglu, M., Monteiro, W., Marks, I. M., Lelliott, P., &
Noshirvani, H. (1988). Urinary cortisol during exposure in obses-
sive-compulsive ritualizers. Psychiatry Research, 23, 131-135,

Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Dura, J. R., Speicher, C. E., Trask, J., & Glaser, R.
(1991). Spousal caregivers of dementia victims: Longitudinal changes
in immunity and health. Psychosomatic Medicine, 53, 345-362.

Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Fisher, L. D., Ogrocki, P., Stout, J. C., Speicher,
C.E., & Glaser, R. (1987). Marital quality, marital disruption, and
immune function. Psychosomatic Medicine, 49, 13-34.

Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., & Glaser, R. (1988). Methodological! issues in be-
havioral immunology research with humans. Brain, Behavior, and
Immunity, 2, 67-78.

Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Kennedy, S., Malkoff, S., Fisher, L., Speicher,
C.E., & Glaser, R. (1988). Marital discord and immunity in males.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 50, 213-229.

Klein, E., Ernberg, I., Masucci, M. G., Szigeti, R., Wu, Y. T., Masucci,
G., & Svedmyr, R. (1981). T-cell response to B-cells and Epstein-Barr
virus antigens in infectious mononucleosis. Cancer Research, 41,
4210-4215.

Laakmann, G., Hinz, A., & Neuhauser, H..(1986). New neuroendocrine
aspects of depression and anxiety. Clinical Neuropharmacology, 9,
245-247.

LAbate, L. (1991). The use of writing in psychotherapy. American Jour-
nal of Psychotherapy, 45, 87-98.

Lutgendorf, S. K., Antoni, M. H., Kumar, M., & Schneiderman, N. (in
press). Changes in cognitive coping strategies predict EBV-antibody
titer change following a stressor disclosure induction. Journal of Psy-
chosomatic Research,

McKinnon, W., Weisse, C. S., Reynolds, C. P., Bowles, C. A., & Baum,

A. (1989). Chronic stress, leukocyte subpopulations, and humoral
Tesponse to latent viruses. Health Psychology, 8, 389-402.

Millon, T. (1969). Modern psychopathology: A biosocial approach to
maladaptive learning and functioning. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.

Millon, T., Green, C. J., & Meagher, R. B. (1982). Millon Behavioral
Health Inventory. Minneapolis, MN: Interpretive Scoring Systems.

Murray, E. J., Lamnin, A. D., & Carver, C. S. (1989). Emotional expres-
sion in written essays and psychotherapy. Journal of Social and Clin-
ical Psychology, 7, 414-429.

Nichols, M. P., & Efran, J. S. (1985). Catharsis is psychotherapy: A new
perspective. Psychotherapy, 22, 46-58.

Pennebaker, J. W. (1985), Traumatic experience and psychosomatic dis-
ease: Exploring the roles of behavior inhibition, obsession, and con-
fiding. Canadian Psychology, 26, 82-95.

Pennebaker, J. W., Barger, S. D., & Tiebout, J. (1989). Disclosure of
traumas and health among Holocaust survivors. Psychosomatic Med-
icine, 51, 577-589.

Pennebaker, J. W., & Beall, S. (1986). Confronting a traumatic event:
Toward an understanding of inhibition and disease. Journal of Abnor-
mal Psychology, 95, 274-281.

Pennebaker, J. W., Colder, M., & Sharp, L. K. (£990). Accelerating the
coping process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58,
528-537.

Pennebaker, J. W., Hughes, C. F., & O’Heeron, R. C. (1987). The psy-
chophysiology of confession: Linking inhibitory and psychosomatic
processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 781-793.

Pennebaker, J. W., Kiecolt-Glaser, J., & Glaser, R. (1988). Disclosure of
traumas and immune function: Health implications for psychother-
apy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 239-245.

Pennebaker, J. W., & O’Heeron, R. C. (1984). Confiding in others and
illness rate among spouses of suicide and accidental-death victims.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 93, 473-476.

Pennebaker, J. W., & Susman, J. R. (1988). Disclosure of traumas and
psychosomatic processes. Social Science and Medicine, 26, 327-332.

Phillips, E. L., & Wiener, D. N. (1966). Short term psychotherapy and
structured behavior change. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Rickinson, A. B., Moss, D. J., Pope, J. H., & Ahlberg, N. (1980). Long-
term T-cell-mediated immunity to Epstein-Barr virus in man. IV. De-
velopment of T-cell memory in convalescent infectious mononucleo-
sis patients. Jnternational Journal of Cancer, 25, 59-65.

Rickinson, A. B., Moss, D. J., Wallace, L. E., Rowe, M., Misko, I. S.,
Epstein, M. A., & Pope, J. H. (1981). Long-term T-cell-mediated im-
munity to Epstein-Barr virus. Cancer Research, 41, 4216-4221.

Rinaldo, C. R., Kingsley, L. W., & Lyter, D. W. (1986). Association of
HTLV-IIE with Epstein-Barr virus infection and abnormalities of T
lymphocytes in homosexual men. Journal of Infectious Diseases,
154, 556-561.

Roberts, G. H. (1989). The many faces of Epstein-Barr virus. Diagnos-
tic and Clinical Testing, 27, 16-21. .

Roncella, S., Caretto, P., Forni, G., Cutrona, G., Verde, A., Ramarli, D.,
de-Celle, P. F., Foa, R., Sessarego, M., & Pistoia, V. (1990). Assess-
ment of the potential malignancy of Epstein-Barr virus infected B
cells in AIDS-related disorders. Cancer Detection and Prevention, 14,
325-329.

Rosenberg, Z. F., & Fauci, A. S. (1991). Activation of latent HIV infec-
tion. Journal of the NIH Research, 2, 41-45.

Salmon, P., Pearce, S., Smith, C. C., Manyande, A., Heys, A., Peters,
N., & Rashid, J. (1989). Anxiety, type A personality and endocrine
responses to surgery. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 28, 279-
280.

Sumaya, C. V. (1986). Epstein-Barr virus serologic testing: Diagnostic
indications and interpretations. Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 5,
337-342.

Tuckwiller, L. S., & Gtaser, R. (1983). Epstein-Barr virus and nasopha-

140 ESTERLING, ANTONI, FLETCHER, MARGULIES, SCHNEIDERMAN

ryngeal carcinoma. In Reznick-Schuller (Ed.), Comparative respira-
tory tract carcinogenesis (pp. 171-185). Cleveland, OH: CRC Press.
Van Rood, Y. R., Bogaards, M., Goulmy, E., & van Houwelingen, H. C.
{in press). The effects of stress and relaxation on the in vitro immune
response in man: A meta-analytic study. Journal of Behavioral Medi-
cine.
Weinberger, D. A., Schwartz, G. E., & Davidson, R. J. (1979). Low-

anxious, high-anxious, and repressive coping styles: Psychometric
patterns and behavioral and physiological responses to stress. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 88, 369-380.

Received December 28, 1992
Revision received April 13, 1993
Accepted April 20, 1993 m

Low Publication Prices for APA Members and Affiliates

Keeping You Up-to-Date: All APA members (Fellows; Members; Associates, and Student
Affiliates) receive—as part of their annual dues~subscriptions to the American Psychologist and

APA Monitor.

High School Teacher and International Affiliates receive subscriptions to the APA Monitor,
and they can subscribe to the American Psychologist at a significantly reduced rate.

In addition, all members and affiliates are eligible for savings of up to 60% (plus a journal

credit) on all other APA journals, as well as significant discounts on subscriptions from coop-
erating societies and publishers (e.g., the American Association for Counseling and Develop-
ment, Academic Press, and Human Sciences Press).

Essential Resources: APA members and affiliates receive special rates for purchases of APA
books, including the Publication Manual of the APA, the Master Lectures, and Journals in Psychol-
ogy: A Resource Listing for Authors.

Other Benefits of Membership: Membership in APA also provides eligibility for low-cost

insurance plans covering life, income protection, office overhead, accident protection, health
care, hospital indemnity, professional liability, research/ academic professional liability, stu-
dent/school liability, and student health.

For more information, write to American Psychological Association,
Membership Services, 750 First Street, NE, Washington, DC 20002-4242, USA


